Pluggable security configuration providers (#59)
strimzi/proposals: 037-pluggable-pod-security-profiles.md

Out of the box, Strimzi will provide implementation supporting two profiles:
* The _baseline_ provider which will mirror the current behavior and can be used when running under the _baseline_ Kubernetes profile
* The _restricted_ provider which will allow to run under the _restricted_ Kubernetes profile

The _baseline_ profile will be used by default.
So users will not see any change by default.
But if they decide to, they will be abe to switch to the _restricted_ profile.

In addition, any user who will need some special configuration, will be able to provide a custom provider plugin.
This will allow them to use their own configurations without specifying them in all custom resources in the `.template` sections.
This might be useful for users who use some custom security tooling and might have their own requirement for the security configuration.
But regular users will not need to write any custom plugins.

The puggable mechanism should also make it easy for the Strimzi itself to add any additional implementations in the future.

### Plugin implementation

#### Interface

> A new interface `PodSecurityProvider` will be added to the `api` module.

Reviewer: Having a single interface might cause difficulties for implementors when we want to add or remove pods. Using `default` methods helps with adding. But removing a method would break source compatibility when implementers had use `@Override`. Maybe having a separate interface for each kind of pod would make for a better compatibility story.

Author: TBH, I don't like this approach. The interface has many methods, but they in general do the same. While we want to provide the granularity _just in case it is needed_, I expect that in most cases they will just delegate to a private method. This is also what the implementations of the baseline and restricted profiles which should be part of Strimzi do.

Having a separate interface for each operand would mean a lot of interfaces and lot of implementation classes. They will largely do all the same but just with higher maintenance effort. Also, the _injection_ of the providers into the model classes in the `cluster-operator` model will need to be done multiple times instead of just once.

All provider plugins will implement this interface.
The reason for having this interface in the `api` module is that this module is distributed though Maven repositories.

> Users will be able to write their implementations by using the `api` module as depednency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Users will be able to write their implementations by using the `api` module as dependency.
```

The interface will have methods for providing security contexts for all Pods created by Strimzi and all containers.
The methods will take as a parameter the user-configured security context from the `.template` section of the custom resources.
The methods for the pods using storage configuration (Kafka and ZooKeeper) will also have the storage configuration as parameter.
These methods will have the default implementation which will always just return the user-specified context.
For example:

```java
    default PodSecurityContext kafkaPodSecurityContext(PodSecurityContext userSecurityContext, Storage storage) {
        return userSecurityContext;
    }

>     default SecurityContext kafkaContainerSecurityContext(SecurityContext userSecurityContext, Storage storage) {

Reviewer: Using the pattern of putting the storage in the signature like this would make for an awkward compatibility story should some pod which today don't use storage change in the future to require storage. 

Using an interface to represent the context for each method might be a more flexible pattern for coping with such changes. 

E.g.

```java
default PodSecurityContext kafkaPodSecurityContext(KafkaPodSecurityContext context) {
    return context.userSuppliedContext();
}

// where

interface KafkaPodSecurityContext {
    Storage storage();
    PodSecurityContext userSuppliedContext();
}

// and similar for all the other methods
```

Author: This is good idea. I added this to the proposal. However, the methods are in general the same. So I propose to use the same context for all of them.

        return userSecurityContext;
    }

    default SecurityContext kafkaInitContainerSecurityContext(SecurityContext userSecurityContext) {
        return userSecurityContext;
    }
```

The interface will also have a `configure` method for configuring the provider.
The `configure` method will get as a parameter an object describing the platform (Kubernetes version, features / APIs) which can be taken into account when creating the security context.

> This method will not havy any default implementtion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This method will not have any default implementation.
```

    * Pods with storage will get a Security Context specifying the file system group as `0`
    * All other pods will get `null` Security Context
    * All containers will get `null` Security Context

The `RestrictedPodSecurityProvider` will implement the following behaviour:
* Return the user-configured security context when specified
* When the user-configure context is `null`:
    * Pods with storage will get a Security Context specifying the file system group as `0`
    * All other pods will get `null` Security Context
    * For the Kaniko container, an exception will be thrown since Kaniko cannot run under the Restricted profile
    * All other containers will get a Security Context matching the _restricted_ Kubernetes profile:
        * Disable privilage escalation
        * Run as non-root
        * Specify the Seccomp profile as `RuntimeDefault`
        * Drop all capabilities

#### Loading the plugins

In the Cluster Operator, the plugins will be loaded using the Java Service Provider Interface which will be used to find the class configured by the user.
A `PodSecurityProviderFactory` class will be part of the `cluster-oprator` module.

> It will have a static initialize method which will load the class based on the configuration, call its `configure(...)` method and store it in a static field for further use.

Reviewer: Can you should the `configure` method in the example above?

Author: Done.

### Configuration

The provider which should be used will be configured using the `STRIMZI_POD_SECURITY_PROVIDER_CLASS` environment variable.
The environment variable will not be configured by default in the installation files.
And when not configured, it will use the `BaselinePodSecurityProvider` by default.

When user decides to configure the class, they can specify the full class name (including the package).
They can also use the following keywords:
* `baseline` for `BaselinePodSecurityProvider`
* `restricted` for `RestrictedPodSecurityProvider`

When the configured class is not found, an error will be thrown during the intialization and the operator will exit.

### Installation files

There will be no changes to the installation files.
If user wants to use Strimzi under a _restricted_ security profile, they can edit the installation files to specify the security context.
That way, the installation files will keep working on the existing environment where they work today.
This includes OpenShift, which's _restricted_ SCC policy is not compatible with the Kubernetes _restricted_ profile.

> In the futere, depending on how many users use the _restricted_ security profile, we can consider adding it to the installtion files and using `RestrictedPodSecurityProvider`  by default.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the future, depending on how many users use the restricted security profile, we can consider adding it to the installation files and using `RestrictedPodSecurityProvider`  by default.
```

## Benefits of this proposal

This proposal will make it easier for the users to run under the different Kubernetes security profiles.
It will also make it much easier to customize the security context configuration if needed by providing custom plugins.

## Rejected alternatives

### Using a separate module for the interface and its implementations

I considered creating a separate Java module for the plugin interface and its implementations instead of having them in the `api` module.

> But it seemed unnecessary without giving some additional advantage and it would make our builds to run longer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
But it seemed unnecessary without giving some additional advantage and it would take the builds longer to run.
```

When running on Kubernetes and using persistent storage, we configure the group which should be used for the storage.
That is the only automatic configuration Strimzi makes.

Users can use the `.template` properties in the Strimzi custom resources to configure their own security context.
This allows them to customize a security context that matches their own requirements and policies.
On OpenShift, the security context is automatically injected into the Pods when they are created based on OpenShift Security Context Constraints (SCC) policies.
This typically involves dropping some capabilities, using some random unprivileged user ID etc.
In some cases, Strimzi users might also use similar systems to inject the security context using admission controllers and similar tools.

The _baseline_ profile basically means that you just use the default settings without requesting any additional privileges or capabilities.
So without any of the additional tooling mentioned previously, Strimzi operators and the Pods created by them at present match the _baseline_ profile.
If you try to run Strimzi in a cluster where the _restricted_ profile is enforced, it does not work out of the box.

> Apart from the Kaniko builder used for the Kafka Connect build, all our components are able to run under the _restricted_ profile.

Author: It needs to run as root. I added it to the proposal.

But the operator doesn't configure the appropriate security context and the admission plugin will reject them.
Users have to _manually_ add the matching security context configuration into the `.template` sections of the custom resources and into the operator deployments to allow the pods to be created under the _restricted_ profile.
To match the _restricted_ profile, users must configure the following security context:

```yaml
          securityContext:
            allowPrivilegeEscalation: false
            capabilities:
              # The restricted allows the use of the NET_BIND_SERVICE capability.
              # But Strimzi does not require it for anything, so we do not include it here.
              drop:
                - ALL
            runAsNonRoot: true
            seccompProfile:
              type: RuntimeDefault
```

While users can configure the security context, it is not user-friendly.
The Pod security context does not cover all the different options required by the _restricted_ profile.
So the security context has to be configured for every container (including init containers, sidecars etc.).

> So a single Kafka cluster might need configuration in 9 different places in the `Kafka` custom resource: ZooKeeper, Kafka broker, Kafka init-container, Topic Operator, User Operator, TLS sidecar, Kafka Exporter, Cruise Control, and another TLS sidecar.

Reviewer 3: "another TLS sidecar" ? Referring to the CC one, it was removed. Anyway it's not so important here.

        return context.userSuppliedContext();
    }

    default SecurityContext kafkaContainerSecurityContext(PodSecurityProviderContext context) {
        return context.userSuppliedContext();
    }

    default SecurityContext kafkaInitContainerSecurityContext(PodSecurityProviderContext context) {
        return context.userSuppliedContext();
    }

    // ...
}
```

The interface will also have a `configure` method for configuring the provider.
The `configure` method will get as a parameter an object describing the platform (Kubernetes version, features / APIs) which can be taken into account when creating the security context.
This method will not have any default implementation.

```java
public interface PodSecurityProvider {
    // ...
    void configure(PlatformFeatures platformFeatures);
    // ...
}
```

`PlatformFeatures` in this method is another new interface which provides some of the methods provided by the `PlatformFeaturesAvailability` class which is part of the `operator-common` module`
It uses the features which might be relevant for generating the securitny context:

```java
public interface PlatformFeatures {
    KubernetesVersion getKubernetesVersion();

>     boolean isOpenshift();

Reviewer: Would something like `platformSuppliesDefaultContext()` actually capture the behaviour we're after? That way the API could support other kube distributions doing similar things to OpenShift, without having to represent every possible distribution in the API.

Author: TBH, I don't know. I'm not sure what other platforms are doing -> some other platforms might simply validate the context without injecting it. Even with OpenShift - it currently injects the security context. But not sure how it will do it in the future once it migrates from SCC to Kubernetes Pod Security Profiles. So I'm not entirely sure if something like `platformSuppliesDefaultContext` makes sense as it might be equally insufficient in the future as `isOpenshift` is. It also shifts more of the logic from the plugin into the core operator which might need to identify the platform and decide what it does. With the currently proposed API, you can do more directly in the plugin - for example decide for different behaviour on OpenShift with version A.B.x versus OpenShift with version C.D.x. So I would probably be inclined to keep the `isOpenshift` as proposed right now.

}
```

The `configure(...)` method can in addition to the `PlatformFeatures` also for example use environment variables to configure the provider.

#### Implementations

We will provide two implementations to support the baseline (default) and restricted profiles:
* `BaselinePodSecurityProvider`

> * `RestrictedPodSecurityProvider`

Reviewer 3: Out of curiosity, aren't we providing a "Privileged" provider for security reasons? I mean, we want the user to be aware of what it means running as "privileged" so he has to create the provider on his own? I can understand that because it would be totally unrestricted.

Reviewer 3: Thanks for the clarification!

These implementations will be also part of the `api` module so that users can just extend them instead of implementing the provider from scratch.

The `BaselinePodSecurityProvider` will implement the current behaviour:

> * Return the user-configured security context when specified

Reviewer 4: I think `userSuppliedContext()` in the above snippets and `user-configured` in this section are the same concept, so we should be consistent with naming.

* When the user-configured context is `null` and we are on OpenShift:

>     * A `null` will be returned (OpenShift injects its own Security Context in that case) for all Pods and containers

Reviewer 4: What about returning a `DefaultSecurityContext` instead of `null`? Null makes me think that there is no security context at all.

Reviewer 4: Ok, thanks for the explanation.

* When the user-supplied context is `null` and we are not on OpenShift:
    * Pods with storage will get a Security Context specifying the file system group as `0`
    * All other pods will get `null` Security Context
    * All containers will get `null` Security Context

The `RestrictedPodSecurityProvider` will implement the following behaviour:
* Return the user-supplied security context when specified
* When the user-supplied context is `null`:
    * Pods with storage will get a Security Context specifying the file system group as `0`
    * All other pods will get `null` Security Context
    * For the Kaniko container, an exception will be thrown since Kaniko cannot run under the Restricted profile
    * All other containers will get a Security Context matching the _restricted_ Kubernetes profile:
        * Disable privilage escalation
        * Run as non-root
        * Specify the Seccomp profile as `RuntimeDefault`

>         * Drop all capabilities

Reviewer 3: Shouldn't we have a couple of examples here to show what is the security context configuration returned when using these two providers?

Author: I added the YAML examples of what they will return.
